Q-CaDD: Accelerating In Silico Methodologies with Quantum Computation and Machine Learning for Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor

Abstract
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is a protein categorised as a member of the Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (RTKs). This family of transmembrane proteins is essential for cell motility, growth, and differentiation. However, through the lens of oncology, Pancreatic and Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) can result from mutations to the EGFR gene. This causes dysfunction and overexpression of the receptor protein, contributing to tumour progression. To address this, a drug discovery pipeline aptly named Q-CaDD (Quantum-enhanced Computer-aided Drug Design) was developed. Q-CaDD leverages quantum computing and in silico drug design methodologies to find novel inhibitors for EGFR. This framework combines quantum algorithms with traditional drug discovery methods by merging best-in-class Machine Learning (ML) models enhanced with Quantum Machine Learning (QML) for toxicity prediction alongside systems like Molecular Docking (MD). Q-CaDD screens ligands for drug-likeness for a specified protein and filters them based on multiple criteria. In the case of EGFR, over 200,000 compounds were screened, and the top five novel inhibitors were identified. It was found that quantum computing can still benefit the drug discovery process even in the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) era, highlighted by the increase in AUC-ROC score for toxicity prediction. Notably, Q-CaDD has been able to overcome current challenges posed by quantum computers effectively, proving its adaptability and demonstrating the promise that Q-CaDD holds as a novel approach in pharmaceutical research. Moreover, this innovation provides promising solutions to drug discovery beyond traditional methods.


This Repo provides all the data used in this research.
